## Sudan: The First Climate Change Conflict? An investigation into the relationship between temperature/precipitation change and violent conflict

# Introduction

Should we expect the effects of climate change to increase the severity of violent conflicts? There is a growing concern that as weather patterns become more extreme, there will be a concomitant increase in violent conflict, namely civil war. However, what remains unclear is whether there have already been violent conflicts that have been fueled by climate change. As such, in this paper I will interrogate the relationship between changes in temperature and precipitation and violent conflict in Sudan between 1997 and 2021. The reason for the focus on temperature and precipitation change is because these are both likely to become more inconstant due to climate change, and the rationale behind analyzing these effects in Sudan is because the civil war in Sudan has been dubbed “the first climate change conflict” (World Food Program USA, 2017). 

My hypothesis is that an increase in average annual temperature and a decrease in average annual precipitation will be correlated with a higher number of fatalities due to violent conflict in Sudan. Given that much of the Sudanese population is dependent upon agriculture, and in warmer and drier periods crop yields often fall, it follows that changes in these two factors can lead to economic stress – and it is well-established in the literature that economic welfare is strongly correlated  with violent conflict (Miguel et al., 2004). The two explanatory variables - which are average observed temperature and average observed precipitation, at the monthly and annual levels - are both taken from the Climatic Research Unit (CRU) of University of East Anglia. Meanwhile, using data from ACLED, the outcome variable is the number of fatalities from battles, protests, riots, violence against civilians, and explosions/remove violence. If the number of fatalities is higher in the years that have higher average temperatures and lower average precipitation levels, this would lend support to my hypothesis. Conversely, if fatality levels are not correlated with a change in temperature or precipitation, then this would provide evidence against my hypothesis. In order to test my hypothesis, this paper will advance in three main parts. First, there will be a data section in which the data sources are unpacked in greater depth and the trends of the key variables are visualized. Second, the main results of the paper are laid out. And in the third section, I will give my concluding remarks, discussing whether the results from my analysis support my hypothesis, the limitations of my analysis, and any areas for improvement.
